---
layout: note
title: Lecture 2 - RPC and Threads
categories: notes 
permalink: notes/distributed-systems/lecture-2/

hidden: true
---

- toc
{: toc }

## Lecture 2: RPC and Threads Notes
Lecture 2 Notes for [MIT 6.824 Distributed Systems](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.824/index.html){:target="_blank"} course.

**Race Conditions**
-race flag to detect race conditions
{% highlight bash %}
$ go run -race temp.go
{% endhighlight %}

Two ways of coordination:
1. Channels
- Useful when no data sharing between threads
2. Locks and Condition Vars
- Shared variables

When main returns and other threads don't, garbage collector does not release the local variables of main since the threads have reference to them.

WaitGroup to keep track of the returned threads:
{% highlight go %}
var done sync.WaitGroup
done.Add(1) // Increase the number of threads to be returned.
done.Done() // Called when a thread returns
done.Wait() // Waits for the Done() for the number of times by decided by Add()
{% endhighlight %}

**RPC semantics under failure**
- at least once:	client automatically retires until response
- at most once:	(duplicates) server makes sure it doesn't execute twice (go)
- exactyl once:	hard! 

> **Failures** make PRC not equal to PC  

## Notes From Google I/O 2012 - Go Concurrency Patterns
[Slides](https://talks.golang.org/2012/concurrency.slide){:target="_blank"}

**Goroutines**  
It's very cheap. It's practical to have thousands, even hundreds of thousands of goroutines.  
It's not a thread.  
There might be only one thread in a program with thousands of goroutines.   
They are multiplexed dynamically onto threads as needed to keep all the goroutines running.  

**Channels**
{% highlight go %}
// Declaring and initializing.
var c chan int
c = make(chan int)
// or
c := make(chan int)
// Sending on a channel.
c <- 1
// Receiving from a channel.
// The "arrow" indicates the direction of data flow.
value = <-c
{% endhighlight %}

Sending and receiving are both blocking so synchronization.
Buffering removes synchronization. 

**Patterns**
- Generator (function that returns a channel): Channels as a handle on a service, we can have more instances of the service.
- Multiplexing: Use fan-in function to combine two or more channels. 
{% highlight go %}
func fanIn(input1, input2 <-chan string) <-chan string {
 c := make(chan string)
 go func() { for { c <- <-input1 } }()**
 go func() { for { c <- <-input2 } }()**
 return c
}
{% endhighlight %}

**Select**
- All channels are evaluated.  
- Selection blocks until one communication can proceed, which then does.  
- If multiple can proceed, select chooses pseudo-randomly.  
- A default clause, if present, executes immediately if no channel is ready.

Fan-in with select:
{% highlight go %}
func fanIn(input1, input2 <-chan string) <-chan string {
	c := make(chan string)
	go func() {
		for {
			select {
				case s := <-input1:  c <- s
				case s := <-input2:  c <- s
			}
		}
	}()
	return c
}
{% endhighlight %}

To not wait for too long:
{% highlight go %}
case <-time.After(1 * time.Second):
	fmt.Println("You're too slow.")
{% endhighlight %}

Quit channel on main:
{% highlight go %}
quit := make(chan bool)
c := boring("Joe", quit)
for i := rand.Intn(10); i >= 0; i-- { fmt.Println(<-c) }
quit <- true
 ----
case <-quit:
 return
{% endhighlight %}

Two way communication on quit channel can be used when goroutine has some cleanup needed to be done, main waits until a message from the goroutine on quit channel before returning.

**Q:** How do we avoid discarding results from slow servers?  
**A:** Replicate the servers. Send requests to multiple replicas, and use the first response.